Blog Post: A look into the new architecture on RNW 0.76 and 0.77 (#8)
microsoft/react-native-devblog: blogposts/2025-01-24-2025-new-architecture-on-76-and-77.md

While there are no immediate plans to deprecate Old Architecture, future investments are focused on the New Architecture. As React Native moves away from Old Architecture, React Native for Windows will follow, with clear migration guidance provided when the time comes.

Have more questions? Read our [FAQ in our new architecture landing page](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/docs/new-architecture#faq)!

## 🛠️ Steps on creating on new architecture application

Let's dive into creating a new architecture application. You'll find the steps below are almost exactly the same as creating a old architecture application - with the only change being is specifying a new architecture template in step 4.

1. Create a new React Native Project

`npx --yes @react-native-community/cli@latest init <projectName> --version "latest"`

2. Navigate into this newly created directory

`cd <projectName>`

3. Add React Native Windows to your project's dependencies

> `yarn add react-native-windows@^0.77.0`

Author: I would rather we direct people to the newer stable version of the preview - especially since Modal is only in 0.77 and we cover it in this blog post - but fine to switch it to lower than 77

4. Initialize the React Native Windows native code and projects with the [new architecture templates](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/docs/init-windows-cli#templates)

`yarn react-native init-windows --template cpp-app --overwrite`

5. Run your RNW app as normal

`npx react-native run-windows`

Congrats, you’ve just created an RNW app using the new architecture! 🎉

[new-fabric-app-2025](assets/2025-01-24-2025-new-architecture-on-76-and-77/new-fabric-app.gif)

## 🚧 New Architecture Changes in 0.76 and 0.77

### 📑 New Templates

> With the preview release of the new architecture, we're introducing brand-new templates! These templates are built to use the precompiled Microsoft.ReactNative NuGet packages by default, enabling faster build times. In the previous architecture, this experience was experimental and had limited support. However, in the new architecture, it has been the primary approach from day one.

Reviewer: Love this callout! Suggest reordering:

```suggestion
The new architecture has been built from day one using the precompiled Microsoft.ReactNative NuGet packages, enabling significantly faster build times. The preview release of the new architecture has brand new templates that take advantage of the precompiled NuGet packages.
```

We now offer two new templates:

> cpp-app: For React Native Windows Applications (New Architecture, C++, Win32, Hermes)

Reviewer: Recommend having a quick callout about how to use these templates, similar in format to the section above.

cpp-lib: For React Native Windows Turbo Modules (New Architecture, C++)

In version 0.77, we further refined these templates, updating CLI commands like `autolink-windows` and `init-windows` to adapt their behavior based on the template used to create the application.

Check out the full list of supported templates [here](https://microsoft.github.io/react-native-windows/docs/init-windows-cli#templates).

### 🪟 Introducing Modal

> In the old UWP-based implementation, we had to work around some frustrating limitations—Modal wasn’t an option, so developers had to use Windows-specific components like Flyout and Popup instead. This created extra work for those transitioning iOS or Android apps, as they needed to rework their code specifically for Windows. But good news—those limitations are a thing of the past! With the New Architecture, those roadblocks are gone, and we’re thrilled to introduce the new *(for RNW)* [Modal component](https://reactnative.dev/docs/modal) in 0.77. We hope customers using Flyout and Popup will find it easy to switch over to Modal and enjoy a more seamless cross-platform experience!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old UWP-based implementation suffered from frustrating limitations in the underlying Windows platform including lack of `Modal` support. Although Windows developers could use Windows-specific components like `Flyout` and `Popup`, this created extra work for those transitioning iOS or Android apps, as they needed to rework their code specifically for Windows. 

Good news! Those limitations are a thing of the past! With the New Architecture, we’re thrilled to introduce the new *(for RNW)* [Modal component](https://reactnative.dev/docs/modal) in 0.77. We hope customers using `Flyout` and `Popup` will find it easy to switch over to `Modal` and enjoy a more seamless cross-platform experience. 
```

[modal-playground-composition-2025](assets/2025-01-24-2025-new-architecture-on-76-and-77/modal-playground.gif)
[*View Source Code*](https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-windows/tree/0.77-stable/packages/%40react-native-windows/tester/src/js/examples/Modal)

> As a brand-new component, Modal is still a work in progress, and we’re actively enhancing its functionality. Currently, it supports the `visible`, `onShow`, and `onDismiss` properties/events. We're hard at work adding support for `transparent`, `backdropColor`, and exciting Windows-specific features like setting a title bar and moving the modal outside of the application boundaries. Stay tuned for more updates!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a brand-new component, Modal is still a work in progress, and we’re actively enhancing its functionality. Currently, Modal supports the `visible`, `onShow`, and `onDismiss` properties/events. We're hard at work adding support for `transparent`, `backdropColor`, and exciting Windows-specific features like setting a title bar and moving the modal outside of the application boundaries. Stay tuned for more updates!
```

> Stay tuned for more updates!

Should this be a link to something? Where should people stay tuned?

### 👩‍💻 New Features for Accessibility, TextInput, and Custom Components

The 0.77 release of the new architecture brings exciting updates to explore! You can now enable custom controls to implement the `expand`/`collapse` action, support a wider range of accessibility features, and take advantage of new properties like `autocapitalize` and `cursor` in TextInput. Check out all the details in our [release notes for 0.77](PLACEHOLDER: link release notes) under the section `New Architecture-Specific Changes`.

## 🛡️ Commitment to Reliability in the Old Architecture

> While we’re focused on rolling out new features for the new architecture, we’re still fully committed to supporting the old architecture. Although no new features are being added, we've made several key reliability improvements. These include resolving Flyout/Alert crashes on Windows 10, optimizing our Text component, ensuring consistent button sizes when pressed, and much more. Additionally, we've added support for TurboModule event emitters, enhanced new project namespace/cleanup, and increased the method parameter limit from 7 to 10.

Reviewer: Recommend softening this. 

```suggestion
While we’re focused on rolling out new features for the new architecture, we recognize the need to support the many folks that are still on the old architecture. Although no new features are being added to the old architecture, we recently made several key reliability improvements including resolving Flyout/Alert crashes on Windows 10, optimizing the Text component, ensuring consistent button sizes when pressed, and more. Additionally, we've added support for TurboModule event emitters, enhanced new project namespace/cleanup, and increased the method parameter limit from 7 to 10.
```
